Spring boot jetty update (#1272)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-09-26-java-jetty-oauth.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Get Started with Jetty, Java, and OAuth"
author: andrew-hughes
by: contractor
communities: [java]
description: "Learn how to use Java and embedded Jetty to create a simple servlet-based web service. Then see how to do it with Spring Boot."
tags: [java, jetty, oauth2]
tweets:
- "Jetty is a highly scalable Java web server and servlet engine. This tutorial shows how to use it with servlets and @springboot."
- "Want to learn how to use Java and embedded @JettyProject to develop REST APIs? This tutorial is for you!"
- "Build a Java REST API with @JettyProject and learn how to lock it down with OAuth 2.0 in this tutorial."
image: blog/featured/okta-java-short-bottle-headphones.jpg

> type: conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type: conversion
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-spring-boot-jetty-example
```

Reviewer: This makes a "code" icon show at the top of the post. It's useful for when I do demos or screencasts.

By default, Spring Boot creates applications with embedded web servers, which means that the server is embedded within the application code itself, so you don't have to run a separate web server to publish Java web applications. However, with a little configuration, you can also publish a WAR file to a separate Jetty or Tomcat servlet container (old-school application server style). Spring also uses Tomcat by default, but you can easily change this, as you'll see.

In this tutorial, you will build a simple web service with Jetty embedded. After that, you will create the same web service in Spring Boot and Jetty. Finally, you'll add JWT (JSON Web Token) authentication and authorization to the web service using method-level security with Okta as the OAuth/OIDC provider.

{% include toc.md %}

## Install the Project Dependencies

Before you start, please make sure you have the following prerequisites installed (or install them now).

- [Java 11](https://adoptium.net/): or use [SDKMAN!](https://sdkman.io/) to manage and install multiple versions
- [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com/manual/#installation): the Okta command-line interface

> - [HTTPie](https://httpie.org/doc#installation): a simple tool for making HTTP requests from a Bash shell

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [HTTPie](https://httpie.org/doc#installation): a simple tool for making HTTP requests from the command line
```

I changed it to be more generic since I use Zsh.

First, take a look at the `pom.xml` file (which is shown below). Notice the Jetty version is set in the properties block. The only project dependency is `jakarta.servlet-api`. It is scoped as `provided` because, in deployment, this package will be provided by the server container.

The Servlet API dependency used to be `javax-servlet-api`, but Java EE is no longer maintained and has been migrated into `jakarta.servlet-api`. This happened when Java EE moved from Oracle to the Eclipse Foundation. As you'll see in the servlet code, this package provides the standardized classes and annotations used to build the servlet.

The packaging type for the project is `war`, not `jar`, and the Maven War plugin has been included in the build dependencies (`maven-war-plugin`).

Lastly, the Jetty Maven plugin has also been included. You can peruse [the docs here](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/jetty-11/programming-guide/index.html#jetty-maven-plugin). It is designed to make the development and testing of Jetty servlets easy by adding Maven goals to run and test the app.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
  xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

  <groupId>com.demo</groupId>
  <artifactId>demo</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <packaging>war</packaging>
  <name>demo</name>

  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
    <maven.compiler.source>1.7</maven.compiler.source>
    <maven.compiler.target>1.7</maven.compiler.target>

>     <jettyVersion>11.0.11</jettyVersion>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <jettyVersion>11.0.12</jettyVersion>
```

  </properties>

  <dependencies>
    <!-- Core Servlet Package -->
    <dependency>

>       <groupId>jakarta.servlet</groupId>

Reviewer: Indent should be 4 spaces for XML, or 2. The most important thing is consistency in this post and the example.

      <artifactId>jakarta.servlet-api</artifactId>
      <version>6.0.0</version>
      <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>

  <build>
    <plugins>
      <!-- Maven Jetty Plugin -->
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.eclipse.jetty</groupId>
        <artifactId>jetty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>${jettyVersion}</version>
        <configuration>
          <stopPort>8080</stopPort>
          <useTestClasspath>false</useTestClasspath>
          <webAppConfig>
              <contextPath>/</contextPath>
          </webAppConfig>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
      <!-- War Plugin -->
      <plugin>

>         <groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
>         <artifactId>maven-war-plugin</artifactId>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <artifactId>maven-war-plugin</artifactId>
```
groupId not needed here since it's from Maven.

        <version>3.3.2</version>
        <configuration>
            <failOnMissingWebXml>false</failOnMissingWebXml>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>

</project>
```

The next file to look at is the `AhoyServlet` class.

`src/main/java/com/demo/AhoyServlet.java`

```java
package com.demo;

> import jakarta.servlet.ServletException;
> import jakarta.servlet.annotation.WebServlet;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import jakarta.servlet.annotation.WebServlet;
```

import jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServlet;
import jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServletRequest;
import jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse;
import java.io.IOException;

@WebServlet(name = "AhoyServlet", urlPatterns = {"ahoy"}, loadOnStartup = 1)
public class AhoyServlet extends HttpServlet {

    protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response)

>         throws ServletException, IOException {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        throws IOException {
```

ServletException is unused.

        response.getWriter().print("Ahoy!");
    }

}
```

This file is the most basic, bare-bones web service. In the code, you're using the `@WebServlet` annotation to define a web servlet without having to define it in a `web.xml` file. You can see [the docs here](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/servlet/4.0/apidocs/javax/servlet/annotation/webservlet) for the annotation.

Run the service from a Bash shell using the following command (run from the `jetty-maven` project root directory).

```bash
./mvnw jetty:run
```

You should see some output that looks like the following.

```bash
[INFO] Configuring Jetty for project: demo

> [INFO] Classes = /home/andrewcarterhughes/Development/okta/2022/jetty-update/maven-jetty/target/classes

Reviewer: todo for Matt: Change these to reflect the GitHub repo name.

[INFO] Context path = /
[INFO] Tmp directory = /home/andrewcarterhughes/Development/okta/2022/jetty-update/maven-jetty/target/tmp
[INFO] web.xml file = null
[INFO] Webapp directory = /home/andrewcarterhughes/Development/okta/2022/jetty-update/maven-jetty/src/main/webapp
[INFO] Web defaults = org/eclipse/jetty/webapp/webdefault.xml
[INFO] Web overrides =  none

> [INFO] jetty-11.0.11; built: 2022-06-21T21:42:55.454Z; git: 58487315cb75e0f5c81cc6fa50096cbeb3b9554e; jvm 11.0.14+9

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[INFO] jetty-11.0.12; built: 2022-09-14T02:38:00.723Z; git: d5b8c29485f5f56a14be5f20c2ccce81b93c5555; jvm 11.0.14+9
```

[INFO] Session workerName=node0
[INFO] Started o.e.j.m.p.MavenWebAppContext@69364b2d{/,[file:///home/andrewcarterhughes/Development/okta/2022/jetty-update/maven-jetty/src/main/webapp/],AVAILABLE}{file:///home/andrewcarterhughes/Development/okta/2022/jetty-update/maven-jetty/src/main/webapp/}
[INFO] Started ServerConnector@4d7cac24{HTTP/1.1, (http/1.1)}{0.0.0.0:8080}

> [INFO] Started Server@42e4e589{STARTING}[11.0.11,sto=0] @2490ms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[INFO] Started Server@42e4e589{STARTING}[11.0.12,sto=0] @2490ms
```

```

Using HTTPie, test the simple service.

```bash
http :8080/ahoy
```

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 5

> Date: Mon, 05 Sep 2022 20:48:28 GMT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Date: Fri, 23 Sep 2022 16:41:39 GMT
```

> Server: Jetty(11.0.11)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Server: Jetty(11.0.12)
```

        }
    }

    protected void doDelete(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response)
        throws IOException {
        String hike = request.getParameter("hike");
        if (hike == null) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            response.getWriter().print("Param 'hike' cannot be null.");
        }
        else {
            this.hikes.remove(hike);
            response.getWriter().print(String.join("\n", this.hikes));
        }
    }

}
```

This is a web app that tracks a list of hikes. It demonstrates how to support POST and DELETE operations, as well as simple GETs and some simple error handling.

If your local Jetty server is still running, you can go ahead and test it. Otherwise, start it again using the `./mvnw jetty:run` command.

```bash
http :8080/hikes
```
```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

Wonderland Trail
South Maroon Peak
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge
```

POST a new hike:

```bash
http -f POST :8080/hikes hike="Pear Lake"
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

Wonderland Trail
South Maroon Peak
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge
Pear Lake

> ```

Reviewer: Remove extra line break at the end of this code block.

DELETE a hike:

```bash
http DELETE :8080/hikes hike=="South Maroon Peak"
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 110

> Date: Mon, 05 Sep 2022 21:01:34 GMT
> Server: Jetty(11.0.11)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Date: Fri, 23 Sep 2022 16:45:59 GMT
Server: Jetty(11.0.12)
```

## Build a web service with Gradle and Jetty

Next, you're going to look at how you can accomplish the same thing you did above, but this time with Gradle instead of Maven. Why? Because some people are allergic to XML and love DSLs instead.

The Gradle-based app is located in the `gradle-jetty` subdirectory.

[Gradle](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/userguide.html) is a Groovy-based build system that uses a custom DSL (domain-specific language) for its build files. Because the build script files are essentially Groovy scripts, the build system is incredibly powerful, thus, very flexible.

To run a Jetty server using Gradle, you'll use [the Gretty plugin](https://github.com/gretty-gradle-plugin/gretty).

From the Gretty docs:

> Gretty is a feature-rich Gradle plugin for running web apps on embedded servlet containers. It supports Jetty versions 7, 8, and 9, Tomcat versions 7 and 8, multiple web apps, and many more. It wraps servlet  container functions as convenient Gradle tasks and configuration DSL

> This project uses Gretty plugin version 4.0.3, which uses Jetty version 11.0.11. Since version 4, Gretty requires Jakarta over Javax. You can use Gretty 3 if you want to support non-Jakarta apps (this is explained on the Gretty GitHub page above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This project uses Gretty plugin version 4.0.3, which uses Jetty version 11.0.11. Since version 4, Gretty requires `jakarta` imports over `javax`. You can use Gretty 3 if you want to support non-Jakarta apps (this is explained on the Gretty GitHub page above).
```

The two Java servlet classes are the same in both projects. I did find that Gretty and Gradle crashed unless I added an empty `src/main/webapp` directory (this wasn't necessary with Maven).

The `build.gradle` file is analogous to the `pom.xml` file.

```bash
plugins {
    id 'java'
    id 'war'
    id 'org.gretty' version '4.0.3'
}

repositories {
    jcenter()
}

dependencies {
    providedCompile 'jakarta.servlet:jakarta.servlet-api:6.0.0'
}

gretty {
    contextPath = '/'
}
```

This is about as simple as it gets. The same Jakarta-based servlet API is included as a provided dependency, and the Gretty plugin is included in the `plugins` block.

The context path is configured to be the root path. If you want to see the other configuration properties, take a look at [the Gretty configuration docs](https://gretty-gradle-plugin.github.io/gretty-doc/Gretty-configuration.html).

You can also look at the Gradle tasks that the plugin adds [in the docs](https://gretty-gradle-plugin.github.io/gretty-doc/Gretty-tasks.html).

To run the web app, use the `appRun` task.

```bash
./gradlew appRun

> ```

Reviewer: Looks like it doesn't work with Java 19:

```
Unsupported class file major version 63
```

Java 17 either:

```
Unsupported class file major version 61
```

It does work with 11.

Author: @mraible Was this in reference to something specific?

You can test the two endpoints: `/hikes` and `/ahoy`.

```bash
$ http :8080/hikes
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

Wonderland Trail
South Maroon Peak
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge

> $: http :8080/ahoy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ http :8080/ahoy
```

By default, Spring Boot is configured to use an embedded Tomcat server. However, this is easily configurable. The [Spring Boot docs on embedded web servers](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/2.0.6.RELEASE/reference/html/howto-embedded-web-servers.html) is a good resource. To switch to Jetty, you need to do two things:

1. disable the default embedded Tomcat server
2. enable an embedded Jetty server

This is done in the `pom.xml` file by these two dependency configuration blocks. The first removes the Tomcat dependency from `spring-boot-starter-web-no-auth`, and the second adds the `spring-boot-starter-jetty` dependency.

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
    <exclusions>
        <!-- Exclude the Tomcat dependency -->
        <exclusion>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-tomcat</artifactId>
        </exclusion>
    </exclusions>
</dependency>
<!-- Use Jetty instead -->
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-jetty</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

> Here is the full `pom.xml`. Notice the Spring Boot version is 2.7.4.

Reviewer: @moksamedia Do you have a repo you created this example in? If so, can you please upgrade it to 2.7.4 and I'll QA against it?

Reviewer: Found it! https://github.com/moksamedia/okta-spring-boot-jetty-2022

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
  xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 https://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

>   <parent>

Reviewer: There's 4 space indents in the previous XML file. Consistency is key!

  <artifactId>SpringBootJetty</artifactId>
  <version>0.0.1-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <name>SpringBootJetty</name>
  <description>Demo project for Spring Boot</description>
  <properties>
    <java.version>11</java.version>
  </properties>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-test</artifactId>
      <scope>test</scope>
    </dependency>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
      <exclusions>
        <!-- Exclude the Tomcat dependency -->
        <exclusion>
          <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
          <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-tomcat</artifactId>
        </exclusion>
      </exclusions>
    </dependency>
    <!-- Use Jetty instead -->
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-jetty</artifactId>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
```

> In this case, you're no longer using the `@WebServlet` annotation. Instead, you're using the Spring Boot web API. The web controller is contained in a class named `WebController`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, you're no longer using the `@WebServlet` annotation. Instead, you're using the Spring MVC API. The web controller is contained in a class named `WebController`.
```

`src/main/java/com/demo/WebController.java`
```java
package com.demo;

import org.springframework.stereotype.Controller;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.*;

import javax.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse;
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.Arrays;
import java.util.List;

@Controller
@RequestMapping(path = "/hikes")
public class WebController {

>    private List<String> hikes = new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private List<String> hikes = new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList(
```

Reviewer: I reformatted in IntelliJ and it collapsed some else statements. I'll add to my QA PR for the example.

Author: I don't like collapsed else statements, personally, but that's just me. I seem to have lost that battle. Whatever you think is best practices.

            "Wonderland Trail", "South Maroon Peak", "Tour du Mont Blanc",
            "Teton Crest Trail", "Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass", "Kesugi Ridge"
    ));

>     @GetMapping("")

Reviewer: Do these really need to specify empty string?

    @ResponseBody
    public String indexGet() {
        return String.join("\n", this.hikes);
    }

    @PostMapping("")
    @ResponseBody
    public String indexPost(@RequestParam String hike, HttpServletResponse response) {
        if (hike == null) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            return "Param 'hike' cannot be null.";
        }
        else if (this.hikes.contains(hike)) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            return "The hike '"+hike+"' already exists.";
        }
        else {
            this.hikes.add(hike);
            return String.join("\n", this.hikes);
        }
    }

    @DeleteMapping("")
    @ResponseBody
    public String indexDelete(@RequestParam String hike, HttpServletResponse response) {
        if (hike == null) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            return "Param 'hike' cannot be null.";
        } else {
            this.hikes.remove(hike);
            return String.join("\n", this.hikes);
        }
    }

}
```

> Some of you might notice that Spring Boot is still using the Java EE Servlet API package and not the newer Jakarta API. It looks like this migration is scheduled for Spring Boot 3.0.0 (see [this issue](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-boot/issues/31720)).

Reviewer: I can confirm. I would just say "Migration is scheduled..."

> To run the Spring Boot app, open a Bash shell and navigate to the `spring-boot-jetty-maven` subdirectory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the Spring Boot app, open a Bash shell and navigate to the `spring-boot-jetty-maven-no-auth` subdirectory.
```

Run the following.

```bash
./mvnw spring-boot:run
```

Wait for it to finish initializing.

```bash
...

> 2022-09-05 16:44:06.968  INFO 1352613 --- [           main] o.s.b.web.embedded.jetty.JettyWebServer  : Jetty started on port(s) 8080 (http/1.1) with context path '/'
> 2022-09-05 16:44:06.974  INFO 1352613 --- [           main] com.demo.SpringBootJettyApplication      : Started SpringBootJettyApplication in 0.832 seconds (JVM running for 1.052)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2022-09-23 12:03:47.012  INFO 1352613 --- [           main] o.s.b.web.embedded.jetty.JettyWebServer  : Jetty started on port(s) 8080 (http/1.1) with context path '/'
2022-09-23 12:03:47.016  INFO 1352613 --- [           main] com.demo.SpringBootJettyApplication      : Started SpringBootJettyApplication in 0.832 seconds (JVM running for 1.052)
```

```

Test it with HTTPie.

```bash
http :8080/hikes
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

Wonderland Trail
South Maroon Peak
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge
```

> This web service has the same features as the `@WebServlet` version: GET, POST, and DELETE but no PUT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This web service has the same features as the `@WebServlet` version: GET, POST, and DELETE, but no PUT.
```

## Deploy the Spring Boot Project

> You now have a Spring Boot application that runs on an embedded Jetty container. To deploy it to a production server, build an executable jar file using `./mvnw package`, copy this jar file (found in the `target` directory) to the server, and run it using java -jar <your jar file name>.jar. There's no need for a separate web server since this jar contains an embedded Jetty web server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You now have a Spring Boot application that runs on an embedded Jetty container. To deploy it to a production server, build an executable jar file using `./mvnw package`, copy this jar file (found in the `target` directory) to the server, and run it using `java -jar <your jar file name>.jar`. There's no need for a separate web server since this jar contains an embedded Jetty web server.
```

In the next section, you will use Spring Security and Okta to protect the POST and DELETE endpoints.

## Use the Okta CLI to Create an OIDC Application

The first step to securing the app is configuring an OpenID Connect (OIDC) app on Okta. OpenID Connect is an identity authentication protocol built on top of OAuth 2.0, an authorization protocol. In short, OIDC is how the app verifies who the user is, and OAuth 2.0 is how the app verifies what the user is allowed to do. Spring Security provides the client-side implementation and, in this example, you'll be using Okta as the cloud provider.

You need to run the following commands from the `spring-boot-jetty-maven-okta` subdirectory.

> {% include setup/cli.md type="web" framework="Okta Spring Boot Starter" loginRedirectUri="https://oidcdebugger.com/debug,http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/okta" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include setup/cli.md type="web" framework="Okta Spring Boot Starter" loginRedirectUri="https://oidcdebugger.com/debug,http://localhost:8080/login/oauth2/code/okta" logoutRedirectUri="https://oidcdebugger.com/,http://localhost:8080/" %}
```

```properties
okta.oauth2.issuer=https://{yourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default
okta.oauth2.clientId={clientId}
okta.oauth2.clientSecret={clientSecret}
```

You also need to update the `SpringBootJettyApplication` class to match the following:

```java
package com.demo;

import org.springframework.boot.SpringApplication;
import org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure.SpringBootApplication;
import org.springframework.security.web.SecurityFilterChain;
import org.springframework.security.config.annotation.web.configuration.EnableWebSecurity;
import org.springframework.security.config.annotation.web.builders.HttpSecurity;
import org.springframework.context.annotation.Bean;

@SpringBootApplication
@EnableWebSecurity
public class SpringBootJettyApplication {

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication.run(SpringBootJettyApplication.class, args);
    }

    @Bean
    public SecurityFilterChain filterChain(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
        http.authorizeRequests()
                .anyRequest().permitAll()
                .and()
                .oauth2ResourceServer().jwt();
        return http.build();
    }

> }

Reviewer: This class already looks like this. Not sure if it needs an update.

```

The above class enables JWT-based OAuth and OIDC security. However, it explicitly allows any request. You are doing this because you are going to use method-level security.

## Protect the DELETE and POST endpoints

> Add the `@PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated")` annotation to the `indexPost()` and `indexDelete()` methods of the `WebController` class. This will require that each request to those endpoints be authenticated -- that is, a valid user will need to be logged in. Because you are using Okta as your OIDC provider, they will be able to have authenticated with Okta's servers, typically through a single sign-on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `@PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated")` annotation to the `indexPost()` and `indexDelete()` methods in the `WebController` class. This will require that each request to those endpoints be authenticated -- that is, a valid user will need to be logged in. Because you are using Okta as your OIDC provider, they will be able to have authenticated with Okta's servers, typically through a single sign-on.
```

> Add the `@PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated")` annotation to the `indexPost()` and `indexDelete()` methods of the `WebController` class. This will require that each request to those endpoints be authenticated -- that is, a valid user will need to be logged in. Because you are using Okta as your OIDC provider, they will be able to have authenticated with Okta's servers, typically through a single sign-on.

Reviewer: The `PreAuthorize` annotation already exists.

Update the `WebController` to the following.

`src/main/java/com/demo/WebController.java`

```java
package com.demo;

import org.springframework.security.access.prepost.PreAuthorize;
import org.springframework.stereotype.Controller;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.*;

import javax.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse;
import java.util.ArrayList;
import java.util.Arrays;
import java.util.List;

@Controller
@RequestMapping(path = "/hikes")
public class WebController {

>    private List<String> hikes = new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private List<String> hikes = new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList(
```

    ));

    @GetMapping("")
    @ResponseBody
    public String indexGet() {
        return String.join("\n", this.hikes);
    }

    @PostMapping("")
    @ResponseBody
    @PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated")  // <- ***ADDED***
    public String indexPost(@RequestParam String hike, HttpServletResponse response) {
        if (hike == null) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            return "Param 'hike' cannot be null.";
        }
        else if (this.hikes.contains(hike)) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            return "The hike '"+hike+"' already exists.";
        }
        else {
            this.hikes.add(hike);
            return String.join("\n", this.hikes);
        }
    }

    @DeleteMapping("")
    @ResponseBody
    @PreAuthorize("isAuthenticated")  // <- ***ADDED***
    public String indexDelete(@RequestParam String hike, HttpServletResponse response) {
        if (hike == null) {
            response.setStatus(400);
            return "Param 'hike' cannot be null.";
        }
        
        
        else {
            this.hikes.remove(hike);
            return String.join("\n", this.hikes);
        }
    }

}

> ```

Reviewer: This class needs formatting and the code already exists too.

> Try to POST a new hike.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try to POST a new hike:
```

> Try to POST a new hike.

Reviewer: You never told me to start my app.

```bash
http -f POST :8080 hike="Pear Lake"
```

```bash
HTTP/1.1 403 Forbidden
...

{
    "error": "Forbidden",
    "path": "/",
    "status": 403,

>     "timestamp": "2022-09-06T14:09:02.533+00:00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "timestamp": "2022-09-23T18:15:31.530+00:00"
```

}
```

## Generate a JWT using the OIDC debugger

To access the protected endpoints, you need to generate an access token JWT. {% include setup/oidcdebugger.md %}

> {% img blog/java-jetty/oidc-debugger.png alt:"OIDC Debugger Configuration" width:"650" %}{: .center-image }

Reviewer: TODO: Confirm this image is up-to-date.

Scroll down and click **Send Request**.

> This will respond with an authorization code, which you need to send back to the authorization URI to retrieve the code.

Reviewer: This seems harder than it needs to be. Maybe it's because you're combining OIDC Debugger and Spring Boot in the same app? Here's what I've done in a previous post: https://developer.okta.com/blog/2022/05/25/java-rest-api-spring-boot#generate-an-oauth-2-0-access-token

  code=i3sP86Ru7spu8gOQUBZUtNC7yBnCQ8PggxJAIBMySpE \
  client_id=0oa918jqqmcbBZxMG4x7 \
  client_secret=VJ8K9k0dZ-pDl9d1BaY2ibaexpFv3vc99OtuHndq \
  redirect_uri=https://oidcdebugger.com/debug
```

```bash
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

{
  "access_token": "eyJraWQiOiJqY3dpbGpUcGVZSG1Jajl6ODR3LVVLQm...",
  "expires_in": 3600,
  "id_token": "eyJraWQiOiJqY3dpbGpUcGVZSG1Jajl6ODR3LVVLQmthYm...",
  "scope": "openid",
  "token_type": "Bearer"
}
```

Copy the access token to your clipboard and store it in a shell variable in the shell window you use to make requests.

```
TOKEN=eyJraWQiOiJIb05xb01mNE9jREltWnBGRnBINjZGTkFOM0J... 
```

Now try and POST a new hike and then remove it.

```bash
http -f POST :8080 hike="Pear Lake" "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

Wonderland Trail
South Maroon Peak
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge
Pear Lake
```

```bash
http DELETE :8080 hike=="South Maroon Peak" "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
...

Wonderland Trail
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge
Pear Lake
```

## Secure the Spring Boot app with Auth0

> You can also use Auth0 to secure the Spring Boot application. Look at the project in the `spring-boot-jetty-maven-auth0` subdirectory.

Reviewer: I like the idea of showing both Okta and Auth0 and having two separate examples on GitHub. 👏

> Auth0 requires removing the `okta-spring-boot-starter` dependency and the addition of the `spring-boot-starter-oauth2-resource-server` (which was added by the Okta Spring Boot Starter). Currently, the Okta Spring Boot Starter does not work with Auth0. There is an [issue to fix this.](https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot/issues/358).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auth0 requires removing the `okta-spring-boot-starter` dependency and the addition of the `spring-boot-starter-oauth2-resource-server` (which was added by the Okta Spring Boot Starter). Currently, the Okta Spring Boot Starter does not work with Auth0. There is a [request to fix this](https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot/issues/358).
```

Reviewer: @bdemers Are you OK with us highlighting that the Okta Spring Boot starter doesn't work with Auth0? :trollface:

If you look at the `pom.xml`, you'll see the added dependency.

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-oauth2-resource-server</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

> Auth0 requires a little more configuration to get it working (this is what the Okta starter was handling for you behind the scenes).

Reviewer: 🥳

```java
package com.demo;

import org.springframework.security.oauth2.core.OAuth2Error;
import org.springframework.security.oauth2.core.OAuth2TokenValidator;
import org.springframework.security.oauth2.core.OAuth2TokenValidatorResult;
import org.springframework.security.oauth2.jwt.Jwt;

class AudienceValidator implements OAuth2TokenValidator<Jwt> {
    private final String audience;

    AudienceValidator(String audience) {
        this.audience = audience;
    }

    public OAuth2TokenValidatorResult validate(Jwt jwt) {
        OAuth2Error error = new OAuth2Error("invalid_token", "The required audience is missing", null);

        if (jwt.getAudience().contains(audience)) {
            return OAuth2TokenValidatorResult.success();
        }
        return OAuth2TokenValidatorResult.failure(error);
    }
}
```

This is used in the `JwtDecoder` bean defined in the `SpringBootJettyApplication` class.

`src/main/java/com/demo/SpringBootJettyApplication.java`

```java
@Value("${auth0.audience}")
private String audience;

@Value("${spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri}")
private String issuer;

@Bean
JwtDecoder jwtDecoder() {

>     NimbusJwtDecoder jwtDecoder = (NimbusJwtDecoder)
>         JwtDecoders.fromOidcIssuerLocation(issuer);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    NimbusJwtDecoder jwtDecoder = JwtDecoders.fromOidcIssuerLocation(issuer);
```

```

## Configure Auth0 OIDC

Install the [Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli) and run `auth0 login` in a terminal.

You need to find your Auth0 domain. One way to do this is to use the following command.

```bash
auth0 tenants list
```

```bash
=== dev-0rb77jrp.us.auth0.com 

  AVAILABLE TENANTS          
  dev-0rb77jrp.us.auth0.com  
```

Take the above domain and replace the placeholder in the `issuer-uri` property in the `application.properties` file. **Don't remove the trailing slash!**

```properties
spring.security.oauth2.resourceserver.jwt.issuer-uri: https://dev-0rb77jrp.us.auth0.com/
auth0.audience=http://my-api
```

The app is configured, and you can go ahead and run it.

```bash
./mvnw spring-boot:run
```

To test the app, you need to open a new Bash shell in the same project subdirectory.

Just like with Okta, you can list the hikes without a JWT.

```bash
http :8080/hikes
...
Wonderland Trail
South Maroon Peak
Tour du Mont Blanc
Teton Crest Trail
Everest Base Camp via Cho La Pass
Kesugi Ridge
```

However, if you try and add or delete a hike, you'll need a token.

To generate a token, create a new API for your resource server.

```bash

> auth0 apis create -n myapi --identifier http://my-api

Reviewer: I'm prompted for scopes here. What should I use?

Reviewer: It seems like you should tell folks to just use the defaults.

```

Use the CLI to create a valid JWT for testing.

```bash

> auth0 test token -a http://my-api

Reviewer: I LOVE this feature!

The packaging type for the project is `war`, not `jar`, and the Maven War plugin has been included in the build dependencies (`maven-war-plugin`).

Lastly, the Jetty Maven plugin has also been included. You can peruse [the docs here](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/jetty-11/programming-guide/index.html#jetty-maven-plugin). It is designed to make the development and testing of Jetty servlets easy by adding Maven goals to run and test the app.

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
  xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

  <groupId>com.demo</groupId>
  <artifactId>demo</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <packaging>war</packaging>
  <name>demo</name>

  <properties>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>

>     <maven.compiler.source>1.7</maven.compiler.source>

Reviewer: Should this be 11?

Author: Sure
